skills/liva-lang/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: liva-lang
description: Complete language reference for Liva — a modern programming language that compiles to Rust. Covers syntax, types, error handling, concurrency, classes, enums, pattern matching, and standard library.
---

# Liva Language

Liva is a modern programming language that compiles to Rust, combining Python's simplicity, TypeScript's clarity, and Rust's performance. The compiler (`livac`) generates idiomatic Rust code that is then compiled to native binaries.

## Key Characteristics

- **Compiles to Rust** — generates `.rs` files + `Cargo.toml`, then `cargo build`
- **Type inference** — types are inferred but can be annotated explicitly
- **Explicit error handling** — `fail` keyword, error binding, `or fail` propagation
- **Hybrid concurrency** — `async`/`await` for I/O + `par`/`parallel` for CPU
- **No semicolons** — newline-terminated statements
- **No `fn`/`def` keyword** — functions declared by name directly

## Essential Syntax Summary

```liva
// Variables
let x = 42
let name: string = "Liva"
const MAX = 100

// Functions
add(a: number, b: number): number => a + b
process(items: [string]) {
    for item in items {
        print(item)
    }
}

// Classes
Person {
    name: string
    age: number
    
    constructor(name: string, age: number) {
        this.name = name
        this.age = age
    }
    
    greet() => $"Hello, I'm {this.name}"
}

// Enums (algebraic data types)
enum Shape {
    Circle(radius: number),
    Rectangle(width: number, height: number),
    Point
}

// Pattern matching
area(s: Shape): number {
    return switch s {
        Shape.Circle(r) => 3 * r * r
        Shape.Rectangle(w, h) => w * h
        Shape.Point => 0
    }
}

// Error handling
readConfig(path: string): string {
    let content, err = File.read(path)
    if err {
        fail "Cannot read config: " + err
    }
    return content
}

// Concurrency
fetchData(url: string): string {
    let response, err = async HTTP.get(url)
    return response or fail
}
```

## Documentation Navigation

For detailed information, consult the following files based on the topic:

### Core Language
- **Variables, constants, scoping** → `../../docs/language-reference/variables.md`
- **Functions (basics, arrow syntax, block functions)** → `../../docs/language-reference/functions-basics.md`
- **Functions (async, fallibility, references, advanced)** → `../../docs/language-reference/functions-advanced.md`
- **Operators (arithmetic, logical, comparison, bitwise)** → `../../docs/language-reference/operators.md`
- **Control flow (if/else, while, for, switch, loops)** → `../../docs/language-reference/control-flow.md`

### Types & Data Structures
- **Primitive types, type inference, annotations** → `../../docs/language-reference/types-primitives.md`
- **Advanced types (tuples, unions, type aliases, Rust native types)** → `../../docs/language-reference/types-advanced.md`
- **Generics (basics, type parameters, constraints)** → `../../docs/language-reference/generics-basics.md`
- **Generics (advanced patterns, multiple constraints)** → `../../docs/language-reference/generics-advanced.md`
- **Enums (algebraic data types, variants, pattern matching)** → `../../docs/language-reference/enums.md`

### Object-Oriented Programming
- **Classes (declaration, constructors, fields, methods)** → `../../docs/language-reference/classes-basics.md`
- **Interfaces (declaration, implementation, multiple)** → `../../docs/language-reference/classes-interfaces.md`
- **Data classes (auto-derive sugar, visibility)** → `../../docs/language-reference/classes-data.md`

### Error Handling & Pattern Matching
- **Error handling (fail, error binding, or fail, try/catch)** → `../../docs/language-reference/error-handling.md`
- **Pattern matching (switch expressions, destructuring, or-patterns)** → `../../docs/language-reference/pattern-matching.md`

### Concurrency
- **Async/await, parallel, tasks, fire** → `../../docs/language-reference/concurrency.md`

### Standard Library
- **Arrays (map, filter, reduce, forEach, find, push, pop, join)** → `../../docs/language-reference/stdlib/arrays.md`
- **Strings (split, replace, trim, toUpper, toLower, includes)** → `../../docs/language-reference/stdlib/strings.md`
- **Math (sqrt, pow, abs, random, PI, E)** → `../../docs/language-reference/stdlib/math.md`
- **Type conversions (parseInt, parseFloat, toString)** → `../../docs/language-reference/stdlib/conversions.md`
- **I/O (print, console.log/error/warn)** → `../../docs/language-reference/stdlib/io.md`

### APIs
- **JSON (parse, stringify, typed parsing)** → `../../docs/language-reference/json-basics.md`
- **JSON (error handling, type mapping, advanced)** → `../../docs/language-reference/json-advanced.md`
- **HTTP (get, post, put, delete, async requests)** → `../../docs/language-reference/http.md`
- **File I/O (read, write, exists, delete)** → `../../docs/language-reference/file-io.md`
- **String templates ($"..." interpolation)** → `../../docs/language-reference/string-templates.md`

### Project Structure
- **Modules and imports (multi-file projects)** → `../../docs/language-reference/modules.md`
- **Visibility (public/private via _ prefix)** → `../../docs/language-reference/visibility.md`
- **Collections (arrays, objects, iteration)** → `../../docs/language-reference/collections.md`

### Quick Reference
- **Complete syntax cheat sheet (all features on one page)** → `../../docs/QUICK_REFERENCE.md`

## Common Pitfalls

1. **No `fn`/`def` keyword** — write `add(a, b) => a + b` not `fn add(a, b)`
2. **No semicolons** — newline terminates statements
3. **`and`/`or`/`not`** — use these instead of `&&`/`||`/`!` (both work, but Liva style prefers words)
4. **Switch expressions vs statements** — expressions use `X => val`, statements use `case X:` with colon
5. **Error binding** — `let value, err = riskyCall()` captures both value and error
6. **`or fail`** — shorthand for propagating errors: `let x = riskyCall() or fail`
7. **String templates** — use `$"text {expr}"` not backticks
8. **Private members** — prefix with `_` (e.g., `_count: number`)
9. **`describe`** is reserved for the test framework — don't use as a function name
10. **Enum construction** — use `Color.Red`, `Shape.Circle(5)` (dot syntax, not `::`)

Commit message:

fix: add instruction to SKILL.md to prevent AI from searching filesystem
AI agents were reading skill docs correctly but then searching the
filesystem for additional context, discovering the livac repo and
reading from there instead of staying within the skill's doc paths.

skills/liva-lang/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: liva-lang
description: Complete language reference for Liva — a modern programming language that compiles to Rust. Covers syntax, types, error handling, concurrency, classes, enums, pattern matching, and standard library.
---

# Liva Language

Liva is a modern programming language that compiles to Rust, combining Python's simplicity, TypeScript's clarity, and Rust's performance. The compiler (`livac`) generates idiomatic Rust code that is then compiled to native binaries.

## Key Characteristics

- **Compiles to Rust** — generates `.rs` files + `Cargo.toml`, then `cargo build`
- **Type inference** — types are inferred but can be annotated explicitly
- **Explicit error handling** — `fail` keyword, error binding, `or fail` propagation
- **Hybrid concurrency** — `async`/`await` for I/O + `par`/`parallel` for CPU
- **No semicolons** — newline-terminated statements
- **No `fn`/`def` keyword** — functions declared by name directly

## Essential Syntax Summary

```liva
// Variables
let x = 42
let name: string = "Liva"
const MAX = 100

// Functions
add(a: number, b: number): number => a + b
process(items: [string]) {
    for item in items {
        print(item)
    }
}

// Classes
Person {
    name: string
    age: number
    
    constructor(name: string, age: number) {
        this.name = name
        this.age = age
    }
    
    greet() => $"Hello, I'm {this.name}"
}

// Enums (algebraic data types)
enum Shape {
    Circle(radius: number),
    Rectangle(width: number, height: number),
    Point
}

// Pattern matching
area(s: Shape): number {
    return switch s {
        Shape.Circle(r) => 3 * r * r
        Shape.Rectangle(w, h) => w * h
        Shape.Point => 0
    }
}

// Error handling
readConfig(path: string): string {
    let content, err = File.read(path)
    if err {
        fail "Cannot read config: " + err
    }
    return content
}

// Concurrency
fetchData(url: string): string {
    let response, err = async HTTP.get(url)
    return response or fail
}
```

## Documentation Navigation

> **IMPORTANT:** All Liva documentation is available ONLY through the relative paths listed below.
> Do NOT search the workspace or filesystem for Liva docs — they are not part of the user's project.
> Read the files below directly using their relative paths from this SKILL.md location.

For detailed information, consult the following files based on the topic:

### Core Language
- **Variables, constants, scoping** → `../../docs/language-reference/variables.md`
- **Functions (basics, arrow syntax, block functions)** → `../../docs/language-reference/functions-basics.md`
- **Functions (async, fallibility, references, advanced)** → `../../docs/language-reference/functions-advanced.md`
- **Operators (arithmetic, logical, comparison, bitwise)** → `../../docs/language-reference/operators.md`
- **Control flow (if/else, while, for, switch, loops)** → `../../docs/language-reference/control-flow.md`

### Types & Data Structures
- **Primitive types, type inference, annotations** → `../../docs/language-reference/types-primitives.md`
- **Advanced types (tuples, unions, type aliases, Rust native types)** → `../../docs/language-reference/types-advanced.md`
- **Generics (basics, type parameters, constraints)** → `../../docs/language-reference/generics-basics.md`
- **Generics (advanced patterns, multiple constraints)** → `../../docs/language-reference/generics-advanced.md`
- **Enums (algebraic data types, variants, pattern matching)** → `../../docs/language-reference/enums.md`

### Object-Oriented Programming
- **Classes (declaration, constructors, fields, methods)** → `../../docs/language-reference/classes-basics.md`
- **Interfaces (declaration, implementation, multiple)** → `../../docs/language-reference/classes-interfaces.md`
- **Data classes (auto-derive sugar, visibility)** → `../../docs/language-reference/classes-data.md`

### Error Handling & Pattern Matching
- **Error handling (fail, error binding, or fail, try/catch)** → `../../docs/language-reference/error-handling.md`
- **Pattern matching (switch expressions, destructuring, or-patterns)** → `../../docs/language-reference/pattern-matching.md`

### Concurrency
- **Async/await, parallel, tasks, fire** → `../../docs/language-reference/concurrency.md`

### Standard Library
- **Arrays (map, filter, reduce, forEach, find, push, pop, join)** → `../../docs/language-reference/stdlib/arrays.md`
- **Strings (split, replace, trim, toUpper, toLower, includes)** → `../../docs/language-reference/stdlib/strings.md`
- **Math (sqrt, pow, abs, random, PI, E)** → `../../docs/language-reference/stdlib/math.md`
- **Type conversions (parseInt, parseFloat, toString)** → `../../docs/language-reference/stdlib/conversions.md`
- **I/O (print, console.log/error/warn)** → `../../docs/language-reference/stdlib/io.md`

### APIs
- **JSON (parse, stringify, typed parsing)** → `../../docs/language-reference/json-basics.md`
- **JSON (error handling, type mapping, advanced)** → `../../docs/language-reference/json-advanced.md`
- **HTTP (get, post, put, delete, async requests)** → `../../docs/language-reference/http.md`
- **File I/O (read, write, exists, delete)** → `../../docs/language-reference/file-io.md`
- **String templates ($"..." interpolation)** → `../../docs/language-reference/string-templates.md`

### Project Structure
- **Modules and imports (multi-file projects)** → `../../docs/language-reference/modules.md`
- **Visibility (public/private via _ prefix)** → `../../docs/language-reference/visibility.md`
- **Collections (arrays, objects, iteration)** → `../../docs/language-reference/collections.md`

### Quick Reference
- **Complete syntax cheat sheet (all features on one page)** → `../../docs/QUICK_REFERENCE.md`

## Common Pitfalls

1. **No `fn`/`def` keyword** — write `add(a, b) => a + b` not `fn add(a, b)`
2. **No semicolons** — newline terminates statements
3. **`and`/`or`/`not`** — use these instead of `&&`/`||`/`!` (both work, but Liva style prefers words)
4. **Switch expressions vs statements** — expressions use `X => val`, statements use `case X:` with colon
5. **Error binding** — `let value, err = riskyCall()` captures both value and error
6. **`or fail`** — shorthand for propagating errors: `let x = riskyCall() or fail`
7. **String templates** — use `$"text {expr}"` not backticks
8. **Private members** — prefix with `_` (e.g., `_count: number`)
9. **`describe`** is reserved for the test framework — don't use as a function name
10. **Enum construction** — use `Color.Red`, `Shape.Circle(5)` (dot syntax, not `::`)
